doc: design for `atlas pull` for the edx-platform and its plugins FC-0012 (#33166)
openedx/edx-platform: docs/decisions/0019-oep-58-atlas-translations-design.rst

Design for Refactoring Translations ``pull`` to use Atlas
##########################################################

Status
======

> Accepted

Author: right?

Reviewer: I believe so, yes.

- Utilize `openedx-atlas`_ to pull translations for development/deployment.

If you're new to the `OEP-58`_ proposal, please
review the `OEP-58 Specifications`_ in addition to the
Key Metrics and Expected Results section in the
`Approach Memo and Technical Discovery - Translations Infrastructure Implementation`_
document before continuing.

Pre-OEP-58 Architecture/Implementation for XBlocks and Plugins
--------------------------------------------------------------

Before `OEP-58`_, Open edX XBlocks and Open edX plugins had the following:

 - Translations live in the GitHub repository.
 - Translations are packaged with the rest of the code when published to pypi

Pros:

 - Translations are always available after installation.

Cons:

 - This can mean a complex integration with Transifex
 - This can mean a lengthy manual PR review process up to a month such as in
   the following example:
   `Added French (Canada) and Japanese - xblock-drag-and-drop-v2 #220`_

XBlockI18nService
-----------------

The `XBlockI18nService`_ loads translations for installed XBlocks via its
``__init__`` method. XBlock translations are only used during the
during the execution of the XBlock.

> The `XBlockI18nService implementation pull request`_ (2016) introduced the
> support for XBlock translations in ``edx-platform`` and has the full
> context of the implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `XBlockI18nService implementation pull request`_ (2016) introduced
support for XBlock translations in ``edx-platform`` and has the full
context of the implementation.
```

.. _js-translations:

JavaScript Translations for XBocks
----------------------------------

As of September 2023, there is no centralized method to bundle JavaScript
translations in XBlocks. Non-XBlock plugins lack JavaScript translation
support altogether.

The de-facto standard method for bundling JavaScript translations in XBlocks
is to use ``web_fragment`` and load the translations as part of the XBlock
frontend static files on every XBlock load.

The LTI Consumer XBlock embeds the translations in its ``web_fragment`` via
the `LtiConsumerXBlock._get_statici18n_js_url`_ and
`LtiConsumerXBlock.student_view`_ methods.

In order to separate the XBlock translations from the platform, it's isolated

> in a separate ``gettext`` name space. For example, the Drag and Drop XBlock

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in a separate ``gettext`` namespace. For example, the Drag and Drop XBlock
```

- `XBlock compiled JavaScript text.js translations`_
- `XBlock main JavaScript file`_

`OEP-58`_ does not change this structure, it just makes the necessary changes
to pull translations from the `openedx-translations repo`_ via ``atlas``
instead of having them live in the XBlock repository itself.

Decisions
=========

Proposed Design for edX Platform ``conf/locale`` translations
-------------------------------------------------------------

We're going to use ``atlas`` in ``make pull_translations`` like we do in
`course-discovery atlas integration`_ and
`frontend-app-learning atlas integration`_.

Proposed Design for XBlocks and Plugins
---------------------------------------

Instead of storing translation files for each XBlock and Plugin in their
respective repositories,
we will use `openedx-atlas`_ to pull them from the
`openedx-translations repo`_.

New ``atlas_pull_plugin_translations`` command
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Introduce new Django commands to the ``edx-platform``:

- ``manage.py lms atlas_pull_plugin_translations --list``: List all XBlocks and
  Plugins installed in the ``edx-platform`` virtual environment. This will

>   list of Python *module names* (as opposed to git repository names) of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  list the Python *module names* (as opposed to git repository names) of the
```

        │   └── LC_MESSAGES
        │       └── djangojs.po
        ├── de
        │   └── LC_MESSAGES
        │       └── djangojs.po
        ├── en
        │   └── LC_MESSAGES
        │       ├── djangojs.po
        │       └── django.po
        └── fr_CA
            └── LC_MESSAGES
                ├── djangojs.po
                └── django.po

BlockI18nService support for ``atlas`` Python translations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``get_python_locale_directory`` will support two modes:

#. If translations for the XBlock/plugin has been pulled by ``atlas``
   from the `openedx-translations repo`_, it will be used. For example, if the
   ``edx-platform/conf/plugins-locale/drag_and_drop_v2/ar/LC_MESSAGES/django.po``
   path exists, it will be used for the Drag and Drop XBlock.

#. Otherwise, the bundled translation files in the XBlock packages will be
   used. The fallback path for the Drag and Drop XBlock will be
   ``lib/python3.8/site-packages/drag_and_drop_v2/translations/ar/LC_MESSAGES/text.po``.

This fallback is used to maintain backwards compatibility with existing
XBlocks that may or may not be included in the `openedx-translations repo`_.

> Third-party XBlocks like the `Lime Survey XBlock`_ will benefit from this
> backward compatibility because it's not included in the
> `xblocks Transifex project`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Third-party XBlocks that are not included in the
`xblocks Transifex project`_, such as the `Lime Survey XBlock`_,
will benefit from this backwards compatibility. 
```

A ``compile_plugin_js_translations`` command will loop over XBlock
modules that has the ``i18n_js_namespace``
property set and compile the JavaScript translations via the `compilejsi18n`_
command.

For example if the Drag and Drop XBlock has
``i18n_js_namespace = 'DragAndDropI18N'``, the
``compile_plugin_js_translations`` command will execute the following
commands::

  i18n_tool generate -v  # Generate the .mo files
  python manage.py compilejsi18n --namespace DragAndDropI18N --output conf/plugins-locale/drag_and_drop_v2/js/

XBlockI18nService support for ``atlas`` JavaScript translations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A ``get_javascript_locale_path`` method will be added to the
``XBlockI18nService`` to provide XBlocks the
appropriate path to ``django.js`` translation files. This method
will allow XBlocks to utilize legacy packaged translations
or ``atlas``.

A ``i18n_js_namespace`` property will be added
to generate JavaScript translations in a centrally managed manner for all
XBlocks as described in the :ref:`js-translations` section.

For example, the `Drag and Drop XBlock get_static_i18n_js_url`_ will need to

> be updated to support both the ``XBlockI18nService`` new
> ``get_javascript_locale_path`` method and the namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be updated to support the new ``XBlockI18nService``
``get_javascript_locale_path`` method and the namespace.
```

Design for Refactoring Translations ``pull`` to use Atlas
##########################################################

Status
======

Pending

Context
=======

OEP-58 Translation Management overview
--------------------------------------

The `Translation Management update OEP-58`_ proposal has been merged with

> the following changes to the way translations are managed in Open edX:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Translation Management update OEP-58`_ proposal has been merged with
the following changes to the way translations are managed in the Open edX platform:
```

- Move Translation Files to the `openedx-translations repo`_
- Add `Transifex GitHub App <https://github.com/apps/transifex-integration>`_

>   to openedx Organization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add the `Transifex GitHub App <https://github.com/apps/transifex-integration>`_
  to openedx Organization
```

- Connect the `openedx-translations repo`_ to the

>   `openedx-translations project`_

Reviewer: It's not clear from this what the `openedx-translations` project is/that it is on Transifex.

Author: done

> - Copy Transifex's Translation Memory and Combine Translators

Reviewer: Couple things here:
* It's probably worth linking to Transifex docs for people unfamiliar with these terms
* It's not clear where things are being copied from and where they are being copied to

Author: done

- Get Translations Back for Deployment/Development and introduce the new

>   `openedx-atlas`_ translation tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Utilize `openedx-atlas`_ to pull translations for development/deployment.
```

If you're new to the `Translation Management update OEP-58`_ proposal, please
review it in addition to the
`Approach Memo and Technical Discovery - Translations Infrastructure Implementation`_

> document before continuing.

Reviewer: My assumption is most people won't read through the entirety of OEP-58 or the approach memo. Instead of instructing people to review both in their entirety, it probably makes sense to link to sections within it when applicable.

> Current Architecture/Implementation for XBlocks and Plugins

Reviewer: I think using "pre OEP-58" instead of "Current" will make this a little more future proof (just in case things aren't updated in the most timely manner once everything fully switches over to the OEP-58 workflow)

-----------------------------------------------------------
As of now the Open edX XBlocks and Plugins are installed via ``pip`` with
their translations embedded within the Python package.

Bundling translations helps to ensure its always available. However, it also
means that in order to update translations, a full opensource contribution
process needs to happen. Somtimes the process takes a full month to
complete such as in the example below:

> - `Added French (Canada) and Japanese - xblock-drag-and-drop-v2 #220`_

Reviewer: It might be nice to break this down a little, something like:

* Translations live in the repo
* Translations are packaged with the rest of the code when published to pypi

Pros:
* Translations are always there

Cons:
* Adding translations means adding a commit directly to the repo
  * This can mean a complex integration with Transifex
  * This can mean a lengthy manual PR review process

XBlockI18nService
-----------------

Once the translations are bundled and the XBlock/Plugin is installed the
XBlockI18nService will be able to find the Python translations and use load
them via the ``__init__`` method of the `XBlockI18nService`_ which finds
the ``text.mo`` files and make it available to the ``edx-platform``

> during the execution of the XBlock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `XBlockI18nService`_ loads translations for all installed XBlocks/Plugins 
via its ``__init__`` method. This makes all the ``text.mo`` files available to ``edx-platform``
during the execution of the XBlock.
```

The `XBlockI18nService implementation pull request`_ (2016) introduced the
support for XBlock translations in ``edx-platform`` and has the full
context of the implementation.

.. _js-translations:

JavaScript Translations for XBocks
----------------------------------

As of September 2023, there is no centralized method to bundle JavaScript
translations in XBlocks. Non-XBlock plugins lacks JavaScript translations

> support altogether.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of September 2023, there is no centralized method to bundle JavaScript
translations in XBlocks. Non-XBlock plugins lack JavaScript translation
support altogether.
```

The de-factor stadnard method for bundling JavaScript translations in XBlocks
is to use ``web_fragment`` and load the translations as part of the XBlock

> frontend static files on every XBlock load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The de-facto standard method for bundling JavaScript translations in XBlocks
is to use ``web_fragment`` and load the translations as part of the XBlock
frontend static files on every XBlock load.
```

The LTI Consumer XBlock embeds the translations in its ``web_fragment`` via
the `LtiConsumerXBlock._get_statici18n_js_url`_ and
`LtiConsumerXBlock.student_view`_ methods.

In order to separate the XBlock translations from the platform, it's isolated
in a separate ``gettext`` name space. For example, the Drag and Drop XBlock
namespace is ``DragAndDropI18N``` which is hardcoded in multiple places such
as:

- `XBlock Makefile compile_translations rule`_
- `XBlock compiled JavaScript text.js translations`_
- `XBlock main JavaScript file`_

This design has it's trade-offs but it's been widely adopted and out of the
scope of this proposal. Therefore, we'll improve on the existing design to

> load the ``atlas`` JavaScript translations instead of the bundled ones.

Reviewer: This could probably be simplified down to something like:

"OEP-58 does not change this structure, it just makes the necessary changes to pull translations from the openedx-translations repo via atlas instead of having them live in the xblock repo itself"

Decisions
=========

Proposed Design for edX Platform ``conf/locale`` translations
-------------------------------------------------------------

Update the ``make pull_translations`` command to use the ``atlas pull``

> if the ``OPENEDX_ATLAS_PULL`` environment variable is set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update the ``make pull_translations`` command to use ``atlas pull``
if the ``OPENEDX_ATLAS_PULL`` environment variable is set.
```

This has been the standard for all repositories as seen in both
`course-discovery atlas integration`_ and
`frontend-app-learning atlas integration`_.

The updated `edx-platform pull_translations`_ would look like the following::

  pull_translations:
    git clean -fdX conf/locale
    ifeq ($(OPENEDX_ATLAS_PULL),)
      find conf/locale -type d -mindepth 1 -maxdepth 1 -exec rm -rf {} +  # Remove stale translation files
      atlas pull $(ATLAS_PULL_ARGS) translations/edx-platform/conf/locale:conf/locale
    else
      i18n_tool transifex pull
    endif
    # The commands below are simplified for demonistration purposes
    i18n_tool generate --verbose 1
    i18n_tool validate --verbose
    paver i18n_compilejs

This mostly is a non-controversial change that has been done in other repos
already.

> The next section is a little more intricate and requires more discussion.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we need all of this here. It seems to be trying to cover a lot of different bases:
* example code
* justification of decision
* talking about the next section

I feel like simplifying this down to just be "We're going to use `atlas` in `make pull_translations` like we do in `course-discovery` and `frontend-app-learning`" might suffice.

Proposed Design for XBlocks and Plugins
---------------------------------------

The proposed design for XBlocks and Plugins is to use the ``atlas pull``
in a centrally managed way for all XBlocks and Plugins to circumvent the
the need for managing the translations in each XBlock.

The XBlock translations is already stored in the `openedx-translations repo`_

> and is accessible by the `openedx-atlas`_ command-line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of storing translation files for each XBlock and Plugin in their respective repositories,
we will use `openedx-atlas`_ to pull them from the `openedx-translations repo`_.
```

New ``ENABLE_ATLAS_TRANSLATIONS`` Waffle Switch
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``ENABLE_ATLAS_TRANSLATIONS`` switch will be disabled by default.
It will be used by the ``XBlockI18nService`` to determine which translations
to use for XBlocks until the `OEP-58`_ is fully implemented and
the non-atlas translations are removed.

The non-XBlock plugins such as `edx-val`_ are out of the scope of this
proposal and will be handled separately as stated in the :ref:`non-goals`

> section.

Reviewer: How will this work when not all repositories are ready to make the switch? It's not clear how we'll handle having some repos pull using atlas and some not.

Author: Agreed. We should allow fallbacking to the embedded translations even if the Waffle Switch is enabled.

Reviewer: I'm not sure exactly what you mean by this. By "allow fallbacking" do you mean allowing per-repo/package configuration of if we should use atlas or not? I foresee situations where we have *some* translations available via `openedx-translations`/`openedx-atlas` but they haven't reached parity with what is included in the repo for one reason or another, in which case `atlas` would still be able to pull something and wouldn't trigger an automatic fallback.

Author: The case which I'm concerned about is non-openedx XBlocks which I think would need fallback. For example, https://github.com/eduNEXT/xblock-limesurvey has a `locale` directory but it's not included in the https://github.com/openedx/openedx-translations repository.

The XBlockI18NService should be able to detect that there's no translations being pulled by `atlas` into the `plugins-locale` directory, therefore should use the `django.mo` from the XBlock itself.

In the case of `@openedx` XBlocks this shouldn't be a concern because all the translations will be synced into the new project on a regular basis up until complete deprecation.

Author: @brian-smith-tcril I've removed the Waffle Switch section because I think backward compatilbity should be there even after OEP-58 has been fully implemented to accommodate for third-party pull requests.

New ``pull_plugins_translations`` command
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Introduce new Django commands to the ``edx-platform``:

- ``manage.py lms pull_plugins_translations --list``: This command
  will list all the XBlocks and Plugins that are installed in the
  ``edx-platform`` virtual environment regardless of whether its run
  in Docker, devstack or Native Installation.

  If the command is executed with the ``--list`` flag it will print a
  list of Python *module names* (as opposed to git repository names) of the
  installed XBlocks and Plugins e.g.::

    $ manage.py lms atlas_pull_plugins_translations --list
    drag_and_drop_v2
    done

>     eox_tenant

Reviewer: naming nit: i think this works better as `atlas_pull_plugin_translations`

"pull plugins translations" reads to me as "pull plugins *and* translations," where as "pull plugin translations" implies that we're pulling the *plugin* translations.

```suggestion
- ``manage.py lms atlas_pull_plugin_translations --list``: List all XBlocks and
  Plugins installed in the ``edx-platform`` virtual environment. This will
  list of Python *module names* (as opposed to git repository names) of the
  installed XBlocks and Plugins e.g.::

    $ manage.py lms atlas_pull_plugin_translations --list
    drag_and_drop_v2
    done
    eox_tenant
```

  This list doesn't include plugins that are bundled within the
  ``edx-platform`` repository itself such as the Video XBlock, the ``capa``
  module and others. The reason for this is that their translations are

>   already included in the ``edx-platform`` translations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This list doesn't include plugins that are bundled within the
  ``edx-platform`` repository itself. Translations for bundled plugins 
  are included in the ``edx-platform`` translation files.
```

- ``manage.py lms atlas_pull_plugins_translations``: This command
  will craft and executes the ``atlas pull`` command for the XBlocks and
  Plugins listed in the previous command. This command is will be added
  to the ``Makefile`` and can be executed for both development and production
  deployments.

  This command will run and ``atlas pull`` with the arguments below to pull
  the translations by module name::

    $ atlas pull \
        translations/edx-platform-links/drag_and_drop_v2/conf/locale:conf/plugins-locale/drag_and_drop_v2 \
        translations/edx-platform-links/done/conf/locale:conf/plugins-locale/done \
        translations/edx-platform-links/edx_proctoring/conf/locale:conf/plugins-locale/edx_proctoring

  It will pull from the `edx-platform-links`_ directory to create the

>   following file tree::

Reviewer: same naming nit: `atlas_pull_plugin_translations`

```suggestion
- ``manage.py lms atlas_pull_plugin_translations``: This command
  will pull translations for installed XBlocks and Plugins by module name::
  
    $ atlas pull \
        translations/edx-platform-links/drag_and_drop_v2/conf/locale:conf/plugins-locale/drag_and_drop_v2 \
        translations/edx-platform-links/done/conf/locale:conf/plugins-locale/done \
        translations/edx-platform-links/edx_proctoring/conf/locale:conf/plugins-locale/edx_proctoring

  Resulting in the following file tree::
```

    $ tree conf/plugins-locale/
    conf/plugins-locale/
    ├── done
    │  ├── ar
    │  │  └── LC_MESSAGES
    │  │      └── django.po
    │  ├── de
    │  │  └── LC_MESSAGES
    │  │      └── django.po
    │  ├── en
    │  │  └── LC_MESSAGES
    │  │      └── django.po
    │  └── fr_CA
    │      └── LC_MESSAGES
    │          └── django.po
    ├── drag_and_drop_v2
    │  ├── ar
    │  │  └── LC_MESSAGES
    │  │      └── django.po
    │  ├── en
    │  │  └── LC_MESSAGES
    │  │      └── django.po
    │  └── fr_CA
    │      └── LC_MESSAGES
    │          └── django.po
    └── edx_proctoring
        ├── ar
        │  └── LC_MESSAGES
        │      └── djangojs.po
        ├── de
        │  └── LC_MESSAGES
        │      └── djangojs.po
        ├── en
        │  └── LC_MESSAGES
        │      ├── djangojs.po
        │      └── django.po
        └── fr_CA
            └── LC_MESSAGES
                └── djangojs.po

**Notes:**

- The command above is for demonstration purposes and may not work
  properly yet.
- The directory name may change from ``edx-platform-links`` to
  ``edx-platform-modules`` but this is out of the scope of this proposal and

>   have little to no impact on the rest of the proposal.

Reviewer: I think we can probably get away without having these notes in here. If we rename the edx-platform-links directory in the openedx-translations repo we just need to make sure to update the docs here to reflect that. The "may not work properly yet" line is something we'll want to remove shortly anyways as we get everything in place.

> **Notes:**
> 
> - The command above is for demonstration purposes and may not work
>   properly yet.
> - The directory name may change from ``edx-platform-links`` to
>   ``edx-platform-modules`` but this is out of the scope of this proposal and
>   have little to no impact on the rest of the proposal.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Changes to the `openedx-translations repo`_
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The `openedx-translations repo`_ organizes the translations by the
GitHub repository name. However, once an XBlock is installed the repository
name is no longer known to the ``edx-platform``. Therefore, we provide two
ways to fetch the XBlock translations:

- By repo name: e.g. `translations/xblock-drag-and-drop-v2 directory`_.
- By module name: e.g.
  `translations/edx-platform-links/drag_and_drop_v2 directory`_.

This update is already implemented in the `openedx-translations repo`_ as of

> `edx-platform-links PR #353`_ which includes the details of the changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `openedx-translations repo`_ directory structure organizes translation files by
repository name. ``edx-platform`` has no record of plugin repository names. As of
`edx-platform-links PR #353`_, it is also possible to use ``atlas`` to pull translations by
module name.
```

BlockI18nService support for ``atlas`` Python translations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``get_python_locale_directory`` will support two modes:

#. When ``ENABLE_ATLAS_TRANSLATIONS`` is disabled, the XBlock translations
   from the ``pip`` packages will be used such as the
   ``lib/python3.8/site-packages/drag_and_drop_v2/translations/ar/LC_MESSAGES/text.po``
   path for the Drag and Drop XBlock.

#. When ``ENABLE_ATLAS_TRANSLATIONS`` is enabled, the atlas translations will
   be used which is located in the ``edx-platform`` in an the git-ignored
   ``edx-platform/conf/plugins-locale/drag_and_drop_v2/ar/LC_MESSAGES/text.po``

>    path. This file pulled by the ``pull_plugins_translations`` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``get_python_locale_directory`` will support two modes:

#. When ``ENABLE_ATLAS_TRANSLATIONS`` is disabled, the XBlock translation files
   included in the ``pip`` packages will be used. For example, the
   ``lib/python3.8/site-packages/drag_and_drop_v2/translations/ar/LC_MESSAGES/text.po``
   path for the Drag and Drop XBlock.

#. When ``ENABLE_ATLAS_TRANSLATIONS`` is enabled, the translation files pulled by ``atlas``
   from the `openedx-translations repo`_ will be used. For example, the 
   ``edx-platform/conf/plugins-locale/drag_and_drop_v2/ar/LC_MESSAGES/text.po``
   path for the Drag and Drop XBlock.
```

XBlockI18nService support for ``atlas`` JavaScript translations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The ``XBlockI18nService`` will provide a new centralized
> ``get_javascript_locale_path`` method to get the JavaScript translations
> ``django.js`` file.
> 
> This function needs to be used by the XBlocks in an opt-in backward-compatible
> manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ``get_javascript_locale_path`` method will be added to the ``XBlockI18nService`` to provide XBlocks the
appropriate path to ``django.js`` translation files. This will allow XBlocks to utilize legacy packaged translations
or ``atlas`` pulled translations depending on configuration settings.
```

A new ``i18n_js_namespace`` property is needed for the :ref:`compile-js-command`
to generate JavaScript translations in a centrally managed manner for all
XBlocks as described in the :ref:`js-translations` section.

The ``i18n_js_namespace`` property will eliminate the need to hardcode the

> namespace the `XBlock Makefile compile_translations rule`_.

Reviewer: When first reading this it wasn't clear how the namespace property was working, I think it might be clearer to have this in the compile js translations section.

``get_javascript_locale_path`` method and the namespace.

.. code:: diff

     class DragAndDropBlock(XBlock):

   +   i18n_js_namespace = 'DragAndDropI18N'

       @staticmethod
       def _get_statici18n_js_url():
           """
           Returns the Javascript translation file for the currently selected language, if any found by
           `pkg_resources`
           """
           lang_code = translation.get_language()
           if not lang_code:
               return None

   +       # TODO: Make this the default once OEP-58 is implemented.
   +       if hasattr(self.i18n_service, 'get_javascript_locale_path'):
   +           atlas_locale_path = self.i18n_service.get_javascript_locale_path()
   +           if atlas_locale_path:
   +               return atlas_locale_path

           text_js = 'public/js/translations/{lang_code}/text.js'
           country_code = lang_code.split('-')[0]
           for code in (translation.to_locale(lang_code), lang_code, country_code):
               if pkg_resources.resource_exists(loader.module_name, text_js.format(lang_code=code)):
                   return text_js.format(lang_code=code)
           return None

> New ``compile_plugins_js_translations`` command

Reviewer: naming nit: maybe either `compile_plugin_js_translations` or `compile_js_plugin_translations`. If you have other ideas I'm all ears!

Author: ```suggestion
New ``compile_js_plugin_translations`` command
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> This command will loop over XBlock modules that has the ``i18n_js_namespace``
> property and compile the JavaScript translations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command will loop over XBlock modules that have the ``i18n_js_namespace``
property and compile the JavaScript translations.
```

> property and compile the JavaScript translations.

Reviewer: > and compile the JavaScript translations.

It's not clear from this documentation what compiling js translations implies. I'm not sure if information explaining that should live here, or if we should link out to something else that explains it, but it'd be nice to make that a little more clear somehow.

Author: I've linked to the [`compilejsi18n` command docs](https://django-statici18n.readthedocs.io/en/latest/commands.html#compilejsi18n).

> For example if the Drag and Drop XBlock has the ``i18n_js_namespace``
> the ``compile_plugins_js_translations`` command will execute the following
> commands::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if the Drag and Drop XBlock has the ``i18n_js_namespace`` property,
the ``compile_plugins_js_translations`` command will execute the following
commands::
```

  i18n_tool generate -v  # Generate the .mo files
  python manage.py compilejsi18n --namespace DragAndDropI18N --output conf/plugins-locale/drag_and_drop_v2/js/

Dismissed Proposals
===================

XBlocks and plugins have their own "atlas pull" command
-------------------------------------------------------

This dismissed proposal intends to have each XBlock and Plugin have their
own ``make pull_translations`` and be responsible for managing pulling their
own translations from the `openedx-translations repo`_.

This proposal has been dismissed because it would require substantial work
to get into the details for the ``lib/python3.8/site-packages/`` directory
and ensure that the ``make pull_translations`` command won't corrupt the
virtual environment.

This is a non-trivial task and appears to add more complexity than necessary

> for not much added benefit.

Reviewer: It'd be nice to elaborate a little bit here. I think the fact that the XBlocks/plugins won't be used outside the context of `edx-platform` makes it so having `edx-platform` manage the translations instead of the modules themselves helps explain the "not much added benefit" part.

Author: ```suggestion
This is a non-trivial task and appears to add more complexity than necessary
due to the fact that XBlocks and plugins won't be used outside the context of ``edx-platform``.
```
